
Gentle Reader,

Attached you will find Draft #1 of my story, "The Dunari" (working title). It is a science
fiction story that I describe as "a first contact story on two levels." Here is a blurb I wrote
about the story:

     Living on a desert planet around a red dwarf star, the dunari wrestle with their
     technological adolescence. Unexpectedly they are visited by an advanced, star-faring
     civilization, the humans, who stumbled on their world looking for a place to build a
     scientific research facility. An uneasy relationship between the dunari and the humans
     unfold amid political and social uncertainty. Meanwhile a young, dunari mathematical genius
     and a human astro-physicist form an unlikely friendship and discover something so profound
     that it will forever change the way both races see themselves---and each other.

When I wrote the story I imposed three constraints on myself. Regardless of any future
revisions, I intend to hold true to these constraints:

1. The entire story is told from the point of view of the dunari.
2. The entire story takes place on the surface of the dunari homeworld, Rujar.
3. Rujar orbits a red dwarf star, with all that implies.

I do have a longish list of questions for the Gentle Reviewers of this work. Please regard this
list as just a starting point for discussion. I don't meant to limit in any way what is said
or discussed about this work.

Here are my questions:

+ Are the dunari too human? In much sci-fi the "aliens" are really just humans wearing funny
  makeup. Star Trek is a classic example of this. On the other hand we want relatable characters
  in our stories. Do I get the balance between "alien-like" and "human-like" right? Considering
  the range of real life human cultures, how does Argenian culture fit into that spectrum?

+ Is Rachel too much of a Mary-Sue? By "Mary-Sue" I mean a character that is insufferably good
  with no real conflicts or development.

+ I feel like some of the minor characters have a lot of unrealized potential, particular Chark,
  Tusk, and Jernumia. Do these characters have interesting character arcs, or no?

+ Colty warms up to Rachel rather quickly. Is it too quickly? I feel like there are squandered
  character development opportunities there.

+ Do the characters have distinct voices? My skills at writing in different voices needs
  improvement. I feel like my characters in this story all sound too similar and suspiciously
  like me. What do you think?

+ The story opens with Chark, a minor character. We don't meet the main characters until
  somewhat later. Is this a problem?

+ One of the challenges of this story is in describing the effects of tidal locking. In a world
  where there is no day/night alternation, and the sun always stays in the same position, there
  would be no circadian rythms. This has surprisingly far reaching effects on dunari culture.
  I've found it very difficult to handle this. How successful do you think I've been?

+ When it comes to the balance of showing/telling I feel as if the story relies too much on
  telling right now. I'm aware of this, but if you find any places where it is particularly
  obvious or problematic, don't hesitate to call them out!

+ I info-dump in a few places. I've tried to keep the info-dumping brief and (hopefully!) at
  least somewhat interesting. Do you notice the info-dumping? Is it a problem?

+ One of my goals is to make the reader feel at home on Rujar and among the dunari living there
  (as Rachel ultimately does). To that end I want to paint a vivid picture of Rujar and Argenian
  culture. How successful do you think I've been? I realize addressing the show/tell balance
  will help here.

+ I make use of quite a few alien words. Although the story is clearly a "translation" from
  Argenian to English, alien words add flavor and help to create the right atmosphere. However,
  they can also be tedious to read. Do I get the balance right? Are there too many made up
  words? Not enough?

+ In Argenian culture all women have names that start with 'J'. This creates a lot of similar
  sounding J-names that can be confusing. Is this a problem? Right now I give names to even some
  transitory characters who probably don't deserve names. I might be able to reduce the "name
  load" by removing some unimportant names entirely. Should I give this some priority?

+ Do you feel like you have a good sense about what dunari look like? Do you understand the
  significance of their gestures and body language? I feel like this is an area that still needs
  significant work. It's hard to show and not tell when the reader doesn't understand the
  meaning of what is being shown!

+ Chapter 47 ("Colty and Rachel go to Varnok") could potentially be removed entirely without
  much impacting the rest of the story. Should the chapter be killed?

+ There is a pacing problem with Part 3. There is a significant time gap between Chapters 89 and
  97. There is also a significant time gap between Chapters 101 and 103. In my view both of
  these gaps are currently too abrupt (and unclear). Chapter 97 could potentially be removed
  entirely (it's vestigial right now anyway), but doing that would make the gap after Chapter 89
  particularly jarring. I'm not sure how to best handle this. Suggestions are welcome.

+ Is the climatic courtroom scene believable? I realize the case being handled would probably
  not be handled by the US Supreme Court, but of course the Argenian legal system is somewhat
  different. Is the scene exciting and dramatic? Or is the scene just tedious and predictable?

+ I make fairly heavy use of space breaks between scenes. Is that a problem? Should I be making
  a bigger effort to write smooth scene transitions without the abrupt breaks?

+ I see the main theme of the story as being spiritual. I want to leave the reader reflecting on
  how we are connected with the larger universe. Did it work? What feeling do you have for the
  religious practices in Argenian culture?

+ When did you realize the chapters were numbered by prime numbers? When did you understand the
  significance of that?

Finally, I'd like to thank you for your time in reading and reviewing my work. I do appreciate
it. I've enjoyed writing this. I hope you enjoy reading it.

Peter Chapin
peter@pchapin.org
